#summary Running record of notes from our team meetings.

= Introduction =
Running record of notes from our team meetings. 

= Sat, March 28 =
== Progress ==
 * Can now actually get into the testbed server remotely
 * Christina got user authentication partially working 

== Group Work ==
 # User Login
 # Email users with initial passwords
 # Setup pairgramming@gmail.com
 # Setup reset password
 # Setup password changing and email 
 # Some changes to UI including banner
 # Account Deletion
 # Account Deletion email

= Thu, March 26 =
== Group Work ==
 * Started some real coding!
    * Garrett started working on authentication stuff
    * Christina started working on interfacing with LDAP and wrote the profile, project and course models
    * Ellen started working on the front-end of the login page in Pyjamas
 * Started learning how to compile Pyjamas to javascript and actually test our stuff
 * Decided to use Django forms for registration, login and project selection

== Current Functionality ==
 * Got registration working
   * Still cannot login
   * Do not send emails with random passwords yet
   * Data *is* stored in the database

== Model Structure ==
=== Profile ===
 * major
 * class year
=== Project ===
 * programmers (model User)
 * course (model Course)
=== Course ===
 * name
 * department
 * course number
 * professor (model User) (still a wishlist feature)
 * year
 * semester
 * TAs (model User) (still a wishlist feature)
We put in some things that we might not end up using so that just in case we have time we won't have to make changes to our basic model types. 

== Authentication Scheme ==
 # User navigates to our page
 # We re-direct them to LDAP
 # They authenticate themselves
 # We use the returned netid as their username
Authentication and project selection are going to be in Django. We will only use Pyjamas once we are actually in the Pairgramming part of the site. 


= Tue, March 24 =
== Spring Break Progress ==
 * Minimal progress
 * Testbed server now ssh-able
 * Tutorials completed

== During Meeting ==
 * Setup server so we can program on the server
 * Got Ellen's local machine working

= Mon, March 9 =

== For This Week and Spring Break ==
 * Christina 
   * needs to get the server working, seems like there might be an issue with OIT and our server doing evil NAT things
   * Pyjamas HelloWorld
 * Ellen
   * Pyjamas HelloWorld
 * Garrett
   * Pyjamas HelloWorld

== Working on the Design Document ==
 * Ellen did some preliminary work on the design document over the weekend
 * Christina and Garrett mostly finished it together today
 * Whole group met to go over the final design document
 * Design document is done?



= Sun, March 1 =

== For Next Week ==
 * Start working on the design document (this is due right before spring break). 
 * Try to be able to connect to our sever (waiting on response from OIT).

== Server Notes ==
Ubuntu server has been installed on old mac. Seems to be working at least locally, but we cannot ping it or ssh to it. We sent a request to OIT to figure out how to make this work. The alias is teamceg.princeton.edu.

Server also has Django already.

== Pyjamas and other Things ==
Pyjamas, Django and a few other things are now in source. 

== SVN ==
Everyone now is able to checkout from SVN and has a version of trunk on their local machine. 



= Sun, Feb 22 =

==Discuss Design Ideas==

===Container===

  * Flashable
  * Pop-out
  * In-place resize
  * Drag & drop

===Configuration Options===
  * Flash rate
  * Ping noise on/off

===Revision Browser===

===Sketch Pad===
  * Save
  * Draw

===File Navigator===
  * Color scheme
  * Tree structure
  * Buttons for operation

===Interactive (AJAX) Text Windows===
====All can ink highlight====
====Code (Editor & Eavesdrop)====
  * Syntax highlighting
  * Monospaced font
  * Synch to server (project-level)
  * Discard changes since last synch (project-level)
  * Save a working copy (user-level)
====Text Chat====
====Console====
  * Monospaced font
  * Commands: compile, run, debug

===Technologies===
  * !PyJamas, Django, Testbed Server