#summary Overview of technologies being used in this project.

= Technologies =

This page contains overview information and links to resources for all of the technologies that we are using on this project.


== Subversion ==

A version control tool used by Google Code for managing our project code.

===Windows:=== 
 * [http://www.collab.net/downloads/subversion/ Command-Line Client]: The essential command-line tool for Subversion.
 * [http://tortoisesvn.net/downloads TortoiseSVN]: Add Subversion interface to Windows Explorer for GUI-like access.

===MacOS:===
 * [http://subversion.tigris.org/getting.html#osx Command-Line Client]: Essential command-line tool for Subversion.

===Linux:===
 * [http://subversion.tigris.org/getting.html Command-Line Client]: Essential command-line tool for Subversion. Find the proper installation for your distro.

===Integration for IDEs:===
 * [http://www.visualsvn.com/visualsvn/ VisualSVN]: Add Subversion to Visual Studio (not free, but has a 30-day trial).
 * [http://subclipse.tigris.org/servlets/ProjectProcess?pageID=p4wYuA Subclipse]: A Subversion plugin for use in the Eclipse IDE.

===Resources:===
 * SubversionTutorial: An overview tutorial on command-line Subversion.
 * [http://svnbook.red-bean.com/en/1.5/index.html Subversion Book]: A free online book covering all aspects of using Subversion.  Goes into lots of detail, definitely more than we need for this project.  Chapters 1 and 2 are probably the most useful.  Chapter 9 is good for reference.
 
